When we've described our portfolio in terms of several factors,
we can also use that information to decompose
the portfolio risk in terms of the risk due to these factors,
and the idiosyncratic risk due to the error term.
Let's start with the expression for the portfolio variance.
First, we write down the variance of the asset returns in terms of the factors.
You'll recognize this expression from previous lessons.
Then we multiply by the holdings vector on either side.
This is now the variance of our portfolio.
We can take the holdings vector inside the parentheses.
We also see that the combination of the holdings vector and
the factor matrix is the portfolio exposure vector.
Now, we see that the portfolio variance is the sum of two terms.
One is the idiosyncratic variance,
and the other is due to the factors.
If we divide the expression by the total variance,
we get what we call a variance decomposition.
Note that the factor covariance matrix times the exposure vector is itself a vector.
So that quantity times the exposure vector
is like a weighted sum of terms for each factor,
with the elements of the exposure vector as weights.
We'll expand out the vector matrix multiplication of
the exposure vector and the factor covariance matrix a little,
so that we can see the sum over factors.
Now, there's a term for each factor
and a term for the idiosyncratic variants which sum to one.
This expression makes the relative contributions of different terms easier to interpret.
Note that the idiosyncratic variance term is never negative,
but the variance contribution from a factor can be negative,
if the factor is acting as a hedge and
reducing variants caused by exposure to other factors.
Note that in this expression,
we assume that the sum over factors is over both risk and Alpha factors.
So although in previous parts of the course,
we left the Alpha factors out of the exposure and factor return matrices,
B, which is wrapped up in E and F. Here, we include them.
So in the sum, a few of the terms in the sum over I
represent the Alpha factors and the others represent the risk factors.